Title: First-trimester triglyceride-glucose index and birth weight: a retrospective cohort mediation analysis of preterm birth and gestational complications.

Abstract: 1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2025 Jul 16;25(1):765. doi: 
10.1186/s12884-025-07885-6.

First-trimester triglyceride-glucose index and birth weight: a retrospective 
cohort mediation analysis of preterm birth and gestational complications.

Cui J(#)(1), Jiang H(#)(2), Huang F(#)(3), Xie M(4), Cui Z(5), Chen X(1), OUYang 
L(1), Li P(6), Wang Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-Sen University, No. 600, Tianhe Road, Guangzhou, 510630, China.
(2)Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shenzhen, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, No. 600, Tianhe Road, Guangzhou, 510630, China.
(4)Department of obstetrics, Shenzhen Longhua District Central Hospital, 
Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Preventive Medicine, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, 
China.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun 
Yat-Sen University, No. 600, Tianhe Road, Guangzhou, 510630, China. 
liping23@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Anesthesiology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, No. 600, Tianhe Road, Guangzhou, 510630, China. 
wangyl5@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Insulin resistance during pregnancy, while physiologically adaptive 
to enhance fetal nutrient supply, becomes pathological when excessive, 
contributing to low birth weight (LBW). The triglyceride-glucose (TyG) index, a 
biomarker of insulin resistance, predicts gestational complications, but its 
pathways to birth weight disparities remain unclear. This study investigates 
whether and to what extent first-trimester TyG index influences birth weight 
through preterm birth and gestational complications.
METHODS: In this retrospective cohort study, 8,605 singleton pregnancies from a 
Chinese hospital (2015-2021) were analyzed. TyG index was calculated from 
first-trimester fasting glucose and triglycerides. Outcomes included gestational 
diabetes mellitus (GDM), hypertension, preeclampsia, preterm birth, LBW, 
macrosomia, and small/large-for-gestational-age (SGA/LGA). Logistic/multinomial 
regression assessed associations, followed by causal mediation analysis (R 
medflex package) to decompose direct/indirect effects. Models adjusted for 
maternal age, body mass index, education, parity, and diabetes family history.
RESULTS: A 1-standard deviation TyG index increase was associated with elevated 
risks of gestational complications (i.e., GDM, gestational hypertension, and 
preeclampsia). Higher TyG index level also showed positive associations with 
adverse birth outcomes: preterm birth (OR = 1.20, 95% CI: 1.08-1.34), LBW 
(OR = 1.11, 95% CI: 1.00-1.24), and LGA (OR = 1.12, 95% CI: 1.05-1.21), but not 
with macrosomia or SGA. Mediation analysis revealed that individual gestational 
complications mediated 17.7% (GDM), 11.1% (gestational hypertension), and 18.9% 
(preeclampsia) of the TyG-LBW association, with a joint mediation effect of 
37.5%. Preterm birth alone mediated 89.0% of the TyG index-LBW association. When 
considering all mediators together (preterm birth and gestational 
complications), the joint natural indirect effect was 1.12 (95% CI 1.05-1.18) 
with a null natural direct effect being 1.00 (95% CI 0.90-1.11), indicating full 
mediation. These mediation patterns were primarily evident among women with 
normal pre-pregnancy weight. Quartile-based comparisons (4th vs. 1st ) yielded 
similar results.
CONCLUSION: Our findings highlight a significant association between the 
first-trimester TyG index and LBW with preterm birth emerging as the primary 
mediating pathway and gestational complications contributing partially to this 
relationship. Future research should explore whether interventions aimed at 
preventing preterm birth and gestational complications can mitigate the LBW 
risk.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-025-07885-6
PMCID: PMC12265213
PMID: 40670958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was approved by the ethics committee of the Third 
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University (serial number: [2021]02–266-01). 
Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.