Title: Diet in Pregnancy: A Review of Current Challenges and Recommendations. A British Nutrition Foundation Briefing Paper.

Abstract: 1. Nutr Bull. 2025 Jul 6. doi: 10.1111/nbu.70016. Online ahead of print.

Diet in Pregnancy: A Review of Current Challenges and Recommendations. A British 
Nutrition Foundation Briefing Paper.

Hart KH(1), Hill AJ(2), Gonzalez JT(3), de la Hunty A(4), Gallagher AM(2), 
Stanner SA(4).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK.
(2)Nutrition Innovation Centre for Food & Health, School of Biomedical Sciences, 
Ulster University, Coleraine, UK.
(3)Centre for Nutrition, Exercise and Metabolism, Department for Health, 
University of Bath, Bath, UK.
(4)British Nutrition Foundation, London, UK.

Pregnancy is a crucial period during which maternal nutrition, weight and 
lifestyle behaviours have a direct impact on both maternal and fetal health. 
This briefing paper describes dietary and lifestyle recommendations for women 
during the preconceptional period and throughout pregnancy, identifying specific 
factors that can be modified to improve health outcomes for both mother and 
child. It considers key areas such as nutrient intakes, supplementation, food 
safety and weight management, and highlights how dietary choices can help reduce 
the risk of common pregnancy-related conditions. Despite widespread recognition 
of the importance of a healthy, balanced diet, many women in the UK fall short 
of recommended intakes for important nutrients, including iron, folate, iodine 
and vitamin D. These shortfalls are particularly evident among nutritionally 
vulnerable groups, such as teenagers, women from lower-income households and 
those experiencing food insecurity; such groups may face barriers to accessing 
healthy foods and adhering to supplementation guidance. An increasing interest 
in plant-based diets presents an opportunity to consider a range of dietary 
patterns that support both maternal health and environmental sustainability. 
However, such shifts must be carefully managed to ensure adequate intake of 
nutrients commonly found in animal products, such as vitamin B12, iron, iodine, 
calcium and long-chain fatty acids. Rates of overweight and obesity among women 
of childbearing age remain high, reflecting trends in the general population and 
contributing to growing concern about maternal obesity. Maintaining a healthy 
weight before and during pregnancy plays a key role in supporting maternal and 
fetal wellbeing. Both insufficient and excessive weight gain are associated with 
elevated risks of complications. Excessive weight gain during pregnancy is 
associated with an increased risk of developing gestational diabetes, 
hypertensive disorders such as pre-eclampsia, preterm birth and a greater 
likelihood of long-term obesity in both mother and child. Supporting women to 
achieve and maintain a healthy weight in the periconceptional period and 
throughout pregnancy is therefore a public health priority. The antenatal period 
presents a unique window of opportunity to promote healthier and more 
sustainable eating patterns, as women are often highly motivated to improve 
their health and are in more regular contact with healthcare professionals at 
this time. Yet, research indicates that many women are unaware of dietary 
recommendations or receive inconsistent advice. To fully harness this 
opportunity, healthcare providers must be equipped with culturally appropriate, 
accessible and evidence-based resources to support perinatal conversations 
around diet, supplementation, physical activity and body weight. Providing 
appropriate support during the periconceptional and early pregnancy period is 
essential to addressing health inequalities, improving long-term wellbeing and 
positively influencing the health of future generations.

Â© 2025 The Author(s). Nutrition Bulletin published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of British Nutrition Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/nbu.70016
PMID: 40618386