Title: Proper diagnosis of latent autoimmune diabetes in adults prompts appropriate pharmacotherapy; C-peptide is just one component.

Abstract: 1. J Diabetes Metab Disord. 2025 Jul 14;24(2):170. doi:
10.1007/s40200-025-01681-x.  eCollection 2025 Dec.

Proper diagnosis of latent autoimmune diabetes in adults prompts appropriate 
pharmacotherapy; C-peptide is just one component.

Record JC(1)(2), Eichelberger AC(1)(3), Johns BL(3)(4), Bouziden GT(3)(5), 
Johnson JL(1)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Oklahoma State University Medical Center, 744 W 9th 
St, Tulsa, OK USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Hillcrest Hospital South, 8801 S 101st E Ave, Tulsa, 
OK USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacy Practice, Southwestern Oklahoma State University 
College of Pharmacy, 100 Campus Dr, Weatherford, OK USA.
(4)Crow/Northern Cheyenne Hospital, Indian Health Service, Department of 
Pharmacy, Crow Agency, P.O. Box 9, Montana, MT USA.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, SSM Health St. Anthony, 1000 N Lee Ave, Oklahoma 
City, OK USA.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, OSU Family Medicine Health Care Center, 
Oklahoma State University Center for Health Sciences, 2345 Southwest Blvd, 
Tulsa, OK 74107 USA.

Latent Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults (LADA) is a type of diabetes that can 
phenotypically resemble type 2 diabetes upon initial presentation but expresses 
the autoimmune component of type 1 diabetes. While technically classed as type 1 
diabetes, LADA is distinct from type 1 and 2 diabetes because of its 
intermediate progression that may or may not lead to complete insulin 
dependence. Differentiation is made with the presence or absence of 
autoantibodies and C-peptide. This is demonstrated in the following case. A 
29-year-old Black female with a history of gestational diabetes and two-year 
history of prediabetes was ultimately diagnosed with type 2 diabetes with an A1c 
of 6.6% and was treated with metformin 500 mg twice daily. Her blood glucose 
suddenly rose to > 400 mg/dL and A1c to 8.6% after 8 months of therapy. Her BMI 
was 22.45 kg/m2. Her provider ordered a C-peptide which measured 1.3 ng/mL 
(normal 0.8-5.2 ng/mL). Since this was technically normal, the provider 
continued with the type 2 diabetes diagnosis. Recognizing the C-peptide was 
low-normal, the clinical pharmacist ordered autoantibody tests, discovering a 
positive glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody (GADA) > 250 IU/mL 
(normal < 0.0-5.0 IU/mL) and confirming the diagnosis of LADA. The pharmacist 
discontinued metformin and initiated a basal/bolus insulin regimen with 
titration. Autoantibody testing is crucial to determine the proper diagnosis 
when the C-peptide is low-normal and should be prioritized. Recognition of the 
signs of LADA and proper diagnostic testing can lead to earlier optimal 
treatment and prevention of diabetes complications.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences 2025. Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) 
holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the 
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such 
publishing agreement and applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s40200-025-01681-x
PMCID: PMC12259510
PMID: 40671733

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing interests.