Title: Maternal and Neonatal Outcomes Associated With Preeclampsia and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Retrospective Cohort Study.

Abstract: 1. Cureus. 2025 Jun 16;17(6):e86120. doi: 10.7759/cureus.86120. eCollection 2025 
Jun.

Maternal and Neonatal Outcomes Associated With Preeclampsia and Gestational 
Diabetes Mellitus: A Retrospective Cohort Study.

Umer A(1), Kanwal S(2), Ahmad A(3), Fatima A(4), Fatima A(5), Farooq F(4), 
Fatima N(6), Jawad S(7).

Author information:
(1)Radiology, Combined Military Hospital, Lahore, Lahore, PAK.
(2)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shalamar Hospital, Lahore, PAK.
(3)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Services Institute of Medical Sciences, Lahore, 
PAK.
(4)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Lady Willingdon Hospital, Lahore, PAK.
(5)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Divisional Headquarters (DHQ) Teaching Hospital, 
Mirpur, Mirpur, PAK.
(6)Internal Medicine, Fauji Foundation Hospital, Lahore, Lahore, PAK.
(7)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Divisional Headquarters (DHQ) Teaching Hospital, 
Gujranwala, Gujranwala, PAK.

Background Preeclampsia and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are common 
pregnancy complications associated with significant maternal and neonatal 
morbidity. Objectives This study aims to evaluate and compare maternal and 
neonatal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia, GDM, and the 
coexistence of both conditions. Methods This retrospective observational study 
included 230 pregnant women who delivered at Shalamar Hospital, Lahore, 
Pakistan, between January 2023 and December 2024. The participants were divided 
into three groups: preeclampsia only (n = 80), GDM only (n = 75), and both 
conditions (n = 75). Results The coexistence of preeclampsia and GDM was 
associated with the highest rates of cesarean section (82.7%, n = 62), preterm 
birth (46.7%, n = 35), neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission (49.3%, n = 
37), and neonatal hypoglycemia (18.7%, n = 14). Maternal complications, 
including intensive care unit (ICU) admission (10.7%, n = 8) and postpartum 
hemorrhage (9.3%, n = 7), were also more frequent in this group. Logistic 
regression confirmed that combined preeclampsia and GDM independently predicted 
adverse outcomes such as cesarean delivery (odds ratio {OR}: 2.4), NICU 
admission (OR: 2.1), and preterm birth (OR: 1.9). Conclusion It is concluded 
that the co-occurrence of preeclampsia and GDM significantly worsens both 
maternal and neonatal outcomes compared to either condition alone. Early 
diagnosis, multidisciplinary management, and targeted interventions are crucial 
to mitigating these risks and improving perinatal care.

Copyright © 2025, Umer et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.86120
PMCID: PMC12265387
PMID: 40672040

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Informed consent for treatment 
and open access publication was obtained or waived by all participants in this 
study. Animal subjects: All authors have confirmed that this study did not 
involve animal subjects or tissue. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.