Title: From Glucotoxicity to Lung Injury: Emerging Perspectives on Diabetes-Associated Respiratory Complications.

Abstract: 1. Lung. 2025 Jul 15;203(1):80. doi: 10.1007/s00408-025-00834-2.

From Glucotoxicity to Lung Injury: Emerging Perspectives on Diabetes-Associated 
Respiratory Complications.

Yu H(1), Liu J(2), He X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, No.1 Youyi Road, Yuzhong, Chongqing, 400016, China. yhm920@126.com.
(2)Department of Geriatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, No.1 Youyi Road, Yuzhong, Chongqing, 400016, China.

Emerging evidence highlights glucose toxicity as a pivotal driver of diabetic 
respiratory complications, characterized by hyperglycemia-induced metabolic 
dysregulation and multi-organ damage. The lung, a metabolically active organ, 
exhibits unique susceptibility to glucose toxicity due to its exposure to 
oxidative stress, inflammatory cascades, and disrupted metabolic reprogramming, 
particularly in glycolysis and mitochondrial dysfunction. Diabetes-associated 
respiratory complications encompass increased susceptibility to respiratory 
infections, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) with macrophage-driven 
glycolytic shifts, and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)-associated fetal lung 
dysplasia via impaired epithelial differentiation. Future research should 
prioritize metabolic dysregulation-targeted therapies, gut-lung axis modulation, 
and personalized approaches to address the interplay between hyperglycemia, 
oxidative stress, and immune dysregulation. Elucidating genetic and epigenetic 
modifiers of glucotoxicity will further advance therapeutic strategies for 
diabetes-associated pneumopathy. This review provides an overview of 
epidemiological burden, lung structural and functional changes, 
pathophysiological mechanisms, clinical outcomes and complications, therapeutic 
and preventive strategies, unanswered questions, and future directions of 
diabetes-associated respiratory complications.

Â© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00408-025-00834-2
PMID: 40665066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests. Ethical Approval: Not applicable. 
Consent to Participate: Not applicable. Consent for Publication: The authors 
consent to publication. Clinical Trial Number: Not applicable.