Title: A murine model of gestational diabetes reveals MASLD risk and alterations in markers of hepatic mitochondrial metabolism.

Abstract: 1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2025 Jun 25;16:1498764. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2025.1498764. eCollection 2025.

A murine model of gestational diabetes reveals MASLD risk and alterations in 
markers of hepatic mitochondrial metabolism.

Shryack GE(1)(2)(3), Krause AA(1)(2)(3), Hernandez Ruano S(4), Schulz LC(5), 
Pennington KA(4), Rector RS(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Service, Harry S Truman Memorial Veterans Medical Center, Columbia, 
MO, United States.
(2)NextGen Precision Health, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, United 
States.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri, 
Columbia, MO, United States.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, United States.
(5)Deparment of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Women's Health, University of 
Missouri, Columbia, MO, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM) impacts roughly 1 in 7 
pregnancies and results in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver 
disease (MASLD) in 30% of these women. Nonetheless, there exists a dearth of 
investigation into the relationship between GDM and MASLD. Here, we sought to 
investigate the potential role of hepatic mitochondrial function in GDM and 
MASLD.
METHODS: One week prior to conception and throughout pregnancy, mice were fed 
either a low-fat control diet (CD) or a high-fat, high-sucrose (HFHS) diet to 
induce an established model of GDM. Maternal livers were collected at day 0, 
6.5, 13.5 and 17.5 of pregnancy. Hepatic markers (via mRNA and western blot 
analyses) of mitochondrial biogenesis, autophagy, mitophagy, activity, and 
function were assessed, as well as markers of inflammation and antioxidant 
status were evaluated.
RESULTS: Progressing gestation in both CD and GDM dams significantly decreased 
protein and mRNA markers of hepatic mitochondrial biogenesis (Pgc1-α, Tfam), 
autophagy (Atg5, Sqstm1), mitophagy (Pink1, Bnip3) and lipid handling (Ampk, 
pAMPK/AMPK, FAS, ACC, pACC, Mttp) with a main effect for time (P<0.05). 
HFHS-induced model of GDM lead to significant elevations in liver triglycerides 
and NAFLD Activity Score (NAS) (P<0.0001, P<0.0001) independent of body weight 
gain during gestation. MASLD development in the GDM mice occurred in conjunction 
with significant reductions in hepatic mitochondrial activity at day 6.5 
(citrate synthase, p<0.01) and day 17.5 (β-HAD, citrate synthase, P<0.001) 
compared to CD mice. However, GDM lead to elevated protein and/or mRNA markers 
of mitochondrial biogenesis (Tfam), mitophagy (BNIP3, Bnip3, Sqstm1, Pink1), 
lipid handling (Mttp), inflammation (Il-1β, Tnf-α, Tgf-β) and antioxidant 
defense (Gxp1, Nfe2l2, Sod2) (P<0.05).
DISCUSSION: Pregnancy, independent of diet, decreased markers of liver 
mitochondrial biogenesis, autophagy, and mitophagy in dams. The GDM mouse model 
exhibited elevated hepatic TG and NAS, as well as decreased liver mitochondrial 
activity. These findings demonstrate that pregnancy and GDM significantly impact 
maternal liver mitochondrial metabolism and unveil new insight on the potential 
relationship between MASLD and GDM.

Copyright © 2025 Shryack, Krause, Hernandez Ruano, Schulz, Pennington and 
Rector.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1498764
PMCID: PMC12237674
PMID: 40636710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.