Title: Adverse perinatal outcomes associated with respiratory distress syndrome in preterm infants: a retrospective analysis.

Abstract: 1. Ital J Pediatr. 2025 Jul 16;51(1):235. doi: 10.1186/s13052-025-02061-0.

Adverse perinatal outcomes associated with respiratory distress syndrome in 
preterm infants: a retrospective analysis.

Ma YJ(1), Sun Y(2), Zhang CH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University (Qingdao), 758 
Hefei Road, Qingdao, Shandong, 266035, China.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Weihai Women and Children's Hospital, Weihai, 
Shandong, 264200, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University (Qingdao), 758 
Hefei Road, Qingdao, Shandong, 266035, China. rainbowzhang001@163.com.

BACKGROUND: With the development of perinatal medicine and the continuous 
improvement of neonatal treatment technology, the birth rate of preterm infants 
is increasing. Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) is one of the most prevalent 
complications with a high mortality rate among preterm infants. It is associated 
with short and long-term adverse outcomes for newborns, and seriously affects 
their survival rate and long-term quality of life. The aim of the present study 
was to investigate the perinatal risk factors for RDS, and the major 
complications and mortality rate associated with RDS in preterm infants, thereby 
providing a basis for preventing the occurrence of RDS and improving the 
prognosis of preterm infants.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted by selecting all preterm 
infants who were admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) of Qilu 
Hospital, Shandong University (Qingdao) after obstetric delivery from January 
2018 to December of 2021. According to whether preterm infants suffered from 
RDS, they were divided into RDS group (n = 319) and Non- RDS group (n = 366).
RESULTS: A total of 685 preterm infants were included. In the RDS group, the 
mothers of preterm infants with RDS were older (P < 0.001) and more of advanced 
maternal age (≥ 35 years, P < 0.005), tended to have a higher rate of cesarean 
section (P = 0.033), and were more likely to be complicated with pregnancy 
diabetes and hypertensive disorders during pregnancy (all P < 0.001). Preterm 
infants with RDS were more prevalent in males (P = 0.025), with smaller 
gestational age, lighter weight and a higher risk of asphyxia at birth (all 
P < 0.001). Preterm infants with RDS after birth had a higher rate of pneumonia, 
sepsis, hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), 
and had longer anti-infection times (duration of antimicrobial use) and 
hospitalization times (all P < 0.001), as well as a higher mortality rate of 
6.0%, while none died in Non-RDS group (P < 0.001). Among preterm infants who 
had died, most of them were males, with a mortality rate 8.5 times higher than 
that of females. Multivariate logistic regression analysis indicated that 
gestational diabetes (OR = 2.283, 95% CI 1.483-3.513), hypertensive disorders 
during pregnancy (OR = 2.201, 95% CI 1.215-3.988), gestational age < 32 weeks 
(OR = 3.914, 95% CI 2.972-5.155), birth weight < 1500 g (OR = 6.610, 95% CI 
2.777-13.735), and asphyxia (OR = 5.239, 95% CI 2.602-10.551) were independent 
risk factors for the occurrence of RDS in preterm infants. Through further 
analysis, we found that the incidence rate of asphyxia in preterm infants with 
RDS who used corticosteroids before delivery was decreased (P = 0.02), while the 
incidence rate of hyperbilirubinemia was increased (P = 0.004), and the 
hospitalization time was prolonged (P = 0.043), however the mortality rate was 
not significantly different between the two groups (P > 0.05). With different 
ventilation modes, the incidence rates of sepsis, BPD and mortality of RDS in 
preterm infants were significantly increased, and the anti-infection times and 
the hospitalization time was prolonged in mechanical ventilation group compared 
with the nasal continuous positive airway pressure ventilation (NCPAP) group 
(all P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: RDS is associated with a higher risk of adverse perinatal outcomes 
and adverse neonatal outcomes in preterm infants. Reasonable use of 
corticosteroid before birth and standardized use of ventilators after birth can 
prevent the occurrence of RDS and improve the prognosis of RDS in preterm 
infants.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-025-02061-0
PMCID: PMC12269104
PMID: 40671065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study involving human participants has been performed in 
accordance with the ethical standards of the Institutional Research Committee 
and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later amendments or comparable 
ethical standards. The study has been approved by the Ethical Commission of Qilu 
Hospital of Shandong University (Qingdao, China). Patients who participated in 
this research had complete clinical data. Written informed consent was obtained 
from the parents of the pediatric patients Consent for publication: Not 
applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.