Title: Association between gestational diabetes mellitus and risk of breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Abstract: 1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2025 Jul 3;16:1621932. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2025.1621932. eCollection 2025.

Association between gestational diabetes mellitus and risk of breast cancer: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Li J(#)(1), Li J(#)(2), Jin J(3), Zhang R(3), Li R(4), Xu X(1), Wang Y(1), Hu 
X(1), Wang L(5), Yu S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Radiology, The Second Medical Centre & National 
Clinical Research Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of the Sixth Health Care, The Second Medical Centre & National 
Clinical Research Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Geriatric Emergency, The Second Medical Centre & National 
Clinical Research Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of the First Health Care, The Second Medical Centre & National 
Clinical Research Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Geriatric Cardiovascular, The Second Medical Centre & National 
Clinical Research Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), a prevalent metabolic 
complication during pregnancy, has a global prevalence of approximately 14%. Its 
onset is closely associated with insulin resistance, insufficient compensatory 
function of β - cells, and abnormal placental function. Epidemiological studies 
have indicated that type 2 diabetes is an independent risk factor for breast 
cancer. However, the association between GDM and the risk of breast cancer 
remains controversial.
OBJECTIVE: This systematic review and meta-analysis aim to comprehensively 
evaluate the association between GDM and the risk of breast cancer and explore 
its underlying mechanisms.
METHODS: This study systematically searched PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, 
EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library databases, covering the period from 
establishing each database until April 14, 2025. Two researchers extracted 
relevant data and assessed the quality of included studies using the 
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. The study evaluated inter-study heterogeneity using the 
I² statistic. Based on the magnitude of heterogeneity, fixed-effect or 
random-effect models were employed to calculate the pooled hazard ratio (HR) and 
its corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI). Additionally, subgroup analyses, 
sensitivity analyses, funnel plot analyses, and publication bias assessments 
were performed. All data analyses were conducted using STATA 17 software.
RESULTS: The overall analysis revealed no significant association between GDM 
and breast cancer risk (HR=1.03, 95%CI: 0.92-1.15). However, subgroup analysis 
revealed significant regional heterogeneity: within the regional subgroups, 
North American results showed an association between GDM and a reduced breast 
cancer risk (HR=0.89, 95%CI: 0.84-0.95), whereas Asian findings suggested an 
association with an increased risk (HR=1.23, 95%CI: 1.15-1.31). No significant 
associations were observed in subgroups based on study design 
(cohort/case-control) or follow-up duration (short-term/long-term). Sensitivity 
analysis demonstrated robust results, and there was no publication bias in this 
study.
CONCLUSION: In summary, there is no significant association between GDM and 
breast cancer risk overall. However, notable regional heterogeneity exists: in 
the North American subgroup, GDM is associated with a reduced risk of breast 
cancer, while in the Asian subgroup, GDM is significantly associated with an 
increased risk of breast cancer.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/, identifier 
CRD420251032589.

Copyright © 2025 Li, Li, Jin, Zhang, Li, Xu, Wang, Hu, Wang and Yu.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2025.1621932
PMCID: PMC12267041
PMID: 40678319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.