Title: Pregnancy and Neonatal Outcomes in Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young: A Systematic Review.

Abstract: 1. Int J Mol Sci. 2025 Jun 24;26(13):6057. doi: 10.3390/ijms26136057.

Pregnancy and Neonatal Outcomes in Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young: A 
Systematic Review.

Ługowski F(1), Babińska J(1), Makowska K(1), Ludwin A(1), Stanirowski PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Warsaw, 
02-091 Warsaw, Poland.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-a monogenic form of 
diabetes-accounts for approximately 1-2% of all diabetes cases, with GCK-MODY 
being the second most commonly diagnosed type. Although the inherited nature of 
the disease implies that the interplay between maternal glycemia and fetal 
genotype directly influences neonatal outcomes, clinical guidelines for 
MODY-complicated pregnancies remain underdeveloped. A systematic literature 
search in the PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Cochrane databases was 
conducted following the PRISMA guidelines. The study protocol has been logged in 
the PROSPERO registry with the identification number CRD42024609390. Data, such 
as MODY type, the gestational age at delivery, mode of delivery, insulin 
administration, mutational status of the fetus, fetal birthweight (FBW), 
occurrence of small-/large-for-gestational age fetus, shoulder dystocia, and 
neonatal hypoglycemia, were extracted and evaluated. Among 19 studies selected 
for the final analysis, 15 investigated perinatal outcomes in the GCK-MODY 
variant. Women diagnosed with GCK-MODY treated with insulin delivered 
approximately 1-2 weeks earlier than those managed with diet alone. FBW was 
significantly higher in GCK-negative as compared to GCK-positive offspring. 
Accordingly, fetal macrosomia was notably more common among unaffected neonates. 
In GCK-affected fetuses, insulin therapy was associated with a significantly 
lower FBW. Fetal genotype critically modifies perinatal outcomes in GCK-MODY 
pregnancies. In the absence of fetal genotyping, conservative management should 
be prioritized to mitigate the risks of fetal growth restriction and iatrogenic 
prematurity. As data regarding other types of MODY in pregnancy remain sparse, 
there is an urgent need for more research in this area.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms26136057
PMCID: PMC12250487
PMID: 40649834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.