Title: The consequences of ultra-processed foods on brain development during prenatal, adolescent and adult stages.

Abstract: 1. Front Public Health. 2025 Jun 23;13:1590083. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2025.1590083. 
eCollection 2025.

The consequences of ultra-processed foods on brain development during prenatal, 
adolescent and adult stages.

Mottis G(1), Kandasamey P(1)(2)(3), Peleg-Raibstein D(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Institute for Neuroscience, Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, Department of Health Sciences and 
Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Ultra-processed foods (UPFs) are highly refined formulations of non-nutritive 
compounds containing elevated amounts of sugar, fat, sodium, food additives, and 
dietary emulsifiers. Consumption of UPF is robustly linked to a range of 
non-communicable diseases, including obesity, type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular 
disease, and mental disorders in adults. While substantial research highlights 
the negative health impacts of UPFs in adulthood, their effects on brain 
development during critical periods of biological vulnerability, pregnancy, 
childhood, and adolescence, remain underexplored. During pregnancy, significant 
metabolic and physiological adaptations occur to support fetal growth, making 
maternal diet quality essential for optimal perinatal outcomes. Poor maternal 
nutrition, including high UPF consumption, has been associated with an increased 
risk of hypertensive disorders, gestational diabetes, and adverse birth weights, 
potentially predisposing offspring to metabolic health disorders later in life. 
Similarly, in early childhood, inadequate nutrition is a key risk factor for 
developmental impairments, influencing cognitive function and long-term health 
outcomes. Adolescence, another critical stage of brain maturation, is 
particularly susceptible to the effects of micronutrient deficiencies, often 
exacerbated by diets high in UPFs, which can impair neurodevelopment and 
cognitive performance. As UPFs continue to dominate modern diets, accounting for 
over 50% of total energy intake in some developed nations, understanding their 
long-term impact on brain development is crucial. Early-life exposure to UPFs 
may contribute to lasting cognitive deficits and increased susceptibility to 
mental health disorders, emphasizing the urgent need for targeted dietary 
interventions and public health strategies aimed at pregnant women, children, 
and adolescents.

Copyright Â© 2025 Mottis, Kandasamey and Peleg-Raibstein.

DOI: 10.3389/fpubh.2025.1590083
PMCID: PMC12235085
PMID: 40630399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.