Title: Serum Uric Acid-to-Serum Creatinine Ratio, Thyroid Function, and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Risk during Early Pregnancy among Chinese Women.

Abstract: 1. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2025 Jul 7;18:2235-2246. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S486695.
 eCollection 2025.

Serum Uric Acid-to-Serum Creatinine Ratio, Thyroid Function, and Gestational 
Diabetes Mellitus Risk during Early Pregnancy among Chinese Women.

Song S(1), Duo Y(1), Zhang Y(2), Qiao X(3), Chen Y(3), Fu Y(1), Dong Y(1), Yuan 
T(1), Zhao W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of Ministry of 
Health, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics, Haidian District Maternal and Child Health Care 
Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics, Beijing Chaoyang District Maternal and Child Health 
Care Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to explore the relationship between serum uric 
acid-to-serum creatinine (UA:SCr) ratio and thyroid function within the normal 
range and in gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) during early pregnancy in 
Chinese women.
METHODS: A total of 958 pregnant women were enrolled in this prospective 
double-center cohort study. Liver function, renal function, and thyroid function 
were tested during 6-12 weeks of gestation and oral glucose tolerance tests were 
conducted for 24-28 weeks to screen for GDM. Associations between UA:SCr ratio 
and thyroid function and GDM were examined by linear and logistic regression 
analyses.
RESULTS: The incidence of GDM was 19.3% (185/958) in this study. UA:SCr ratio 
and free thyroxine (FT4) were significantly higher in pregnant women with GDM in 
the highest preBMI quartile than the normal glucose tolerance group (median 
5.22, IQR 4.47-5.87 vs median 4.87, IQR 4.05-5.61, mean difference -0.52, 
P=0.04; median 1.13, IQR 1.02-1.28 vs median 1.18, IQR 1.07-1.32, mean 
difference 0.14, P=0.02). Both UA:SCr ratio and FT4 were associated with risk of 
GDM in pregnant women in the highest preBMI quartile (RR 0.331, 95% CI 
1.094-1.772, P=0.007; RR -1.533, 95% CI 0.055-0.853, P=0.029). For pregnant 
women in the third and fourth preBMI quartiles, the UA:SCr ratio was 
significantly correlated with euthyroid function (FT4 and UA:SCr ratio): preBMI 
quartile 3 - β=0.659, 95% CI 0.231-1.087), P=0.003; FT4 and UA:SCr ratio in 
preBMI quartile 4 - β=-0.263, 95% CI -0.516 to-0.011, P=0.041; TSH and UA:SCr 
ratio in preBMI-quartile 4 - β=0.131, 95% CI 0.008-0.253, P=0.036. Further 
analysis revealed that FT4 was associated with risk of GDM in pregnant women in 
the highest UA:SCr ratio quartile (RR 0.052, 95% CI 1.010-1.096, P=0.012). There 
was also an interaction effect between FT4 and UA:SCr ratio in relation to the 
risk of GDM in the highest UA:SCr ratio quartile (P=0.02).
CONCLUSION: Both UA:SCr ratio and FT4 were associated with the risk of GDM in 
early pregnancy, particularly among women in the highest prepregnancy BMI 
quartile. FT4 level within the normal range was correlated with UA:SCr ratio in 
women in the third and fourth prepregnancy BMI quartiles. These results suggest 
the complex interplay of metabolic changes during early pregnancy and provide 
new insights for the early prevention and management of GDM.

© 2025 Song et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DMSO.S486695
PMCID: PMC12248715
PMID: 40655163

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest regarding the publication of this paper.