Title: High-Calorie Diet Exacerbates the Crosstalk Between Gestational Diabetes and Youth-Onset Diabetes in Female Offspring Through Disrupted Estrogen Signaling.

Abstract: 1. Nutrients. 2025 Jun 26;17(13):2128. doi: 10.3390/nu17132128.

High-Calorie Diet Exacerbates the Crosstalk Between Gestational Diabetes and 
Youth-Onset Diabetes in Female Offspring Through Disrupted Estrogen Signaling.

Jia X(1), Cao X(1), Wang Y(1), Yang S(1), Ji L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Qingdao University, Qingdao 
266021, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Maternal & Fetal Medicine of National Health Commission of 
China, Shandong Provincial Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated to 
Qingdao University, Jinan 250014, China.

Background/Objectives: Recent global trends highlight a concerning rise in 
youth-onset type 2 diabetes (YOT2D), with a marked female preponderance. We aim 
to explore the crosstalk between gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and YOT2D 
in female offspring. Methods: In vivo, GDM mice were induced by Western diet 
(WD), and their female offspring were fed normal diet or WD within 3 to 8 weeks. 
We continuously detected the glucose metabolism disorders, serum estradiol level 
(ELISA), and the process of ovarian maturation. Meanwhile, the dynamic changes 
in ERα and insulin signal in liver were monitored (qPCR, Western blot). In 
vitro, LO2 cells were treated with estradiol or ER antagonist BHPI to further 
explore the mechanism. Results: More than 85% of pregnant mice induced by WD 
were GDM models. The serum estradiol level in GDM offspring mice was decreased 
during sexual maturation, accompanied by marked oral glucose intolerance, 
insulin resistance, and even diabetes. The advance of sexual maturation and the 
decrease in serum estradiol in GDM offspring were mainly due to the 
downregulation of CYP19A1 in the ovaries, the reduced area of secondary 
follicles, and the increased number of atresia follicles, which could be greatly 
worsened by WD. Furthermore, GDM suppressed the protein levels of ERα, p-IRS-1, 
and p-Akt in liver tissue, that is, estrogen signals and insulin signaling were 
simultaneously weakened. WD further exacerbated the above changes. In vitro, 
estradiol upregulated the protein levels of ERα, p-IRS-1, and p-Akt in LO2 
cells, while BHPI inhibited these changes. Conclusions: Maternal GDM promotes a 
high incidence of YOT2D in female offspring by affecting ovarian maturation, and 
a high-calorie diet exacerbates this process.

DOI: 10.3390/nu17132128
PMCID: PMC12251584
PMID: 40647233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.