Title: Which dietary pattern should be adopt by age-appropriate pregnant women to avoid gestational weight gain and gestational diabetes mellitus.

Abstract: 1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2025 Jul 2;25(1):683. doi:
10.1186/s12884-025-07801-y.

Which dietary pattern should be adopt by age-appropriate pregnant women to avoid 
gestational weight gain and gestational diabetes mellitus.

Li Y(1), Zheng H(1), Jiang W(1), Chi Y(1), Meng Y(1), Mo Y(1), Chen C(1), Qu 
B(1), He J(1), Chen F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology Center, The First 
Hospital of Jilin University, No.1 Xinmin Road, Changchun, 130000, China.
(2)Department of General Gynecology I, Obstetrics and Gynecology Center, The 
First Hospital of Jilin University, No.1 Xinmin Road, 130000, Changchun, China. 
chenfeng0715@jlu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Gestational weight gain (GWG) and gestational diabetes mellitus 
(GDM), as two major adverse pregnancy outcomes, could be affected by diet 
patterns, and GWG also influenced GDM. Therefore, we aimed to explore the four 
diet quality scores and two adverse pregnancy outcomes in a more macroscopic 
way.
METHODS: 667 women for GWG part and 333 women for GDM part who were pregnant 
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), aged 20 to 
44 years, were involved in this study, respectively. Four diet quality scores 
including dietary inflammatory index (DII), dietary Approaches to Stop 
Hypertension (DASH), Healthy Eating Index-2015 (HEI-2015), and Alternative 
Healthy Eating Index-2010 (AHEI-2010) were chosen in this study.
RESULTS: We found that higher HEI-2015 and AHEI-2010 were associated with lower 
risk of GWG, especially for advanced maternal age. Lower DII and higher DASH 
were associated with lower risk of GDM. These associations were robust after 
excluding the diabetic patients. For pregnant women with GWG, DASH was 
negatively associated with the risk of GDM. Summarily, adherence of healthy 
dietary pattern associated with decreased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes.
CONCLUSION: Adherence of healthy dietary pattern associated with decreased risk 
of adverse pregnancy outcomes. We recommend that pregnant women take dietary 
precautions with foods consisting of fruits and vegetables, low-fat dairy 
products, whole grains, and legumes.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-025-07801-y
PMCID: PMC12220641
PMID: 40604570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The NCHS Research Ethics Review Board approved the protocols of 
NHANES of the National Center for Health Statistics, CDC. ID: NCHS IRB/ERB 
Protocol # 2011-17、Continuation of Protocol #2011-17. All subjects were provided 
with written informed consent. Consent for publication: Not applicable. 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
