Title: GDM links to increased neonatal myocardial hypertrophy via ANGPTL7: prospective cohort study.

Abstract: 1. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2025 Dec;45(1):2531366. doi: 10.1080/01443615.2025.2531366.
 Epub 2025 Jul 18.

GDM links to increased neonatal myocardial hypertrophy via ANGPTL7: prospective 
cohort study.

Jian W(1)(2), Shi S(1), Yang X(1), Huang Y(3), Du C(3), He M(1), Li X(1), Huang 
M(1), Yuan R(1), Wei L(1), Yang S(2), Cai S(1), Yang J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Zhongshan City People's Hospital, Zhongshan, 
China.
(2)Department of Neonatology, Guangdong Maternal and Children Hospital, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) can negatively impact newborn 
cardiac health, particularly causing myocardial hypertrophy. This study examined 
the relationship between umbilical cord blood levels of angiopoietin-like 
protein 7 (ANGPTL7) in term neonates born to mothers with GDM and myocardial 
development, assessing its potential as an early predictive marker.
METHODS: The study involved 46 newborns exposed to GDM and 46 healthy controls. 
Measure the interventricular septum (IVS) thickness through cardiac ultrasound 
and evaluate the level of ANGPTL7 in umbilical cord blood using the ELISA 
method.
RESULTS: The incidence of myocardial hypertrophy in the GDM group was 19.6%, 
significantly higher than 0% in the control group, and increased to 27.3% in 
neonates of mothers with GDM and poor glycaemic control. ANGPTL7 levels in the 
GDM group were significantly elevated compared to the control group (1.87 vs. 
1.11 ng/mL). Furthermore, these levels were positively correlated with IVS 
thickness. In the poorly-controlled GDM subgroup (GDM-A), neonates had 
significantly higher ANGPTL7 levels and IVS/LVPW ratio (1.19 vs. 1.03), 
indicating more severe myocardial abnormalities.
CONCLUSION: ANGPTL7 may contribute to myocardial hypertrophy in GDM neonates by 
promoting insulin resistance. Monitoring ANGPTL7 levels in umbilical cord blood 
could help identify high-risk neonates and guide optimal glycaemic management 
during pregnancy. Although the sample size was small, the study offers new 
evidence of ANGPTL7's clinical utility. Future research should expand the sample 
size and investigate the molecular mechanisms of ANGPTL7 to develop personalised 
interventions.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was not registered prospectively.

Plain Language Summary: This study explored how diabetes during pregnancy 
affects newborns’ heart health, focusing on a protein called ANGPTL7 in 
umbilical cord blood that may relate to heart issues in infants. To explore 
this, we compared 46 babies born to mothers with GDM to 46 babies born to 
mothers without diabetes. Doctors performed heart ultrasounds on these babies to 
measure the thickness of their heart walls and also tested the levels of ANGPTL7 
in their umbilical cord blood.Our main discoveries were that babies born to 
mothers with diabetes were more likely to have thicker heart walls compared to 
babies born to mothers without diabetes. Furthermore, when diabetes was not well 
managed during pregnancy, the babies faced an even higher risk of heart 
problems. We also found that higher levels of ANGPTL7 in the umbilical cord 
blood were associated with more severe changes in the heart structure of these 
newborns.These findings are significant because testing for ANGPTL7 at birth 
could help doctors in several ways. It could identify babies who need closer 
monitoring of their heart health, guide mothers on how to better control their 
diabetes during pregnancy to protect their baby’s heart, and pave the way for 
developing new treatments aimed at safeguarding the hearts of babies born to 
mothers with diabetes. Although further research is necessary, our study offers 
hope for improved care and outcomes for both mothers with diabetes and their 
newborns.

DOI: 10.1080/01443615.2025.2531366
PMID: 40679909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]