Title: Type 2 diabetes risk communication following a diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus: A qualitative study.

Abstract: 1. Diabet Med. 2025 Jul 15:e70105. doi: 10.1111/dme.70105. Online ahead of print.

Type 2 diabetes risk communication following a diagnosis of gestational diabetes 
mellitus: A qualitative study.

Caba M(1), Northern A(2), Virdee A(2), Khunti K(1)(2)(3)(4), Davies MJ(1)(2)(4), 
Hadjiconstantinou M(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Centre, College of Life Sciences, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, UK.
(2)Leicester Diabetes Centre, University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, 
Leicester, UK.
(3)NIHR Applied Research Collaboration East Midlands, Leicester, UK.
(4)NIHR Leicester Biomedical Research Centre, Leicester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) increases women's risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes (T2DM) tenfold. Understanding of T2DM risk in women 
with GDM is variable and can impact health behaviours. To better understand how 
T2DM risk is communicated by healthcare professionals, we explored women's 
experiences of T2DM risk communication and support following a diagnosis of GDM.
METHODS: A qualitative study was conducted utilising semi-structured interviews. 
Participants were 10 women previously diagnosed with GDM. Transcripts were 
analysed following reflexive thematic analysis guidelines.
RESULTS: Three themes and four sub-themes were created to describe women's 
experiences of, and responses to, T2DM risk communication and support following 
a diagnosis of GDM. Minimal T2DM risk communication during GDM and postnatally 
was a common experience, and as a result, women forgot about their increased 
risk and felt forgotten by the health service. The lack of correspondence and 
support further fostered a dearth of knowledge and misunderstandings regarding 
what T2DM is, how it affects a person's body, and the necessity of preventative 
actions, all of which could impact women's management of their risk. Several 
strategies were suggested by women to remedy the currently absent communication 
and support. This included group education sessions, tangible and digital 
support resources, providing individualised information, and continuous and 
harmonious T2DM risk communication from healthcare professionals and health 
services.
CONCLUSIONS: Current deficiencies for communicating T2DM risk and providing 
avenues of support following a diagnosis of GDM leaves many women feeling 
under-supported. Improvements to current care are recommended to ameliorate 
this.

Â© 2025 The Author(s). Diabetic Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on 
behalf of Diabetes UK.

DOI: 10.1111/dme.70105
PMID: 40665564