Title: Cell-free circulating epigenomic signatures: Non-invasive biomarkers of pregnancy-related outcomes associated with plasticizer exposure.

Abstract: 1. Reprod Toxicol. 2025 Jul 18:109000. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2025.109000.
Online  ahead of print.

Cell-free circulating epigenomic signatures: Non-invasive biomarkers of 
pregnancy-related outcomes associated with plasticizer exposure.

Rajan AK(1), Mohanty A(1), Swain P(1), Tiwari R(1), Gurjar V(2), Srivasatava 
RK(3), Mishra PK(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Environmental Biotechnology, Genetics & Molecular Biology 
(EBGMB), ICMR-National Institute for Research in Environmental Health (NIREH), 
Bhopal, India.
(2)Division of Environmental Biotechnology, Genetics & Molecular Biology 
(EBGMB), ICMR-National Institute for Research in Environmental Health (NIREH), 
Bhopal, India; Faculty of Medical Research, Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, India.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
New Delhi, India.
(4)Division of Environmental Biotechnology, Genetics & Molecular Biology 
(EBGMB), ICMR-National Institute for Research in Environmental Health (NIREH), 
Bhopal, India; Faculty of Medical Research, Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, India. Electronic address: pkm_8bh@yahoo.co.uk.

Globally, plastics have revolutionized industrial and societal advancements, but 
their durability and low degradability have led to significant environmental 
pollution. Plasticizers, such as bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates, are widely 
used to enhance the flexibility and durability of plastics; however, they are 
also recognized as endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) with severe health 
implications. These chemicals are associated with reproductive toxicity, 
developmental disruptions, and multigenerational health effects. Recent research 
has highlighted the impact of plasticizers on irreversible epigenetic 
modifications, which influence abnormal gene expression patterns without 
altering the DNA sequence. Histone alterations, DNA methylation, and non-coding 
RNA regulation are essential pathways. Exposure to BPA and phthalates disrupts 
these epigenetic processes, leading to long-term reproductive health issues, 
including infertility, implantation failures, preterm birth, and pregnancy 
complications such as gestational diabetes and preeclampsia. Cell-free 
circulating nucleic acids are promising non-invasive biomarkers for the early 
detection of pregnancy complications, such as preeclampsia, with the potential 
to predict sensitivity and track gestational age and underlying 
pathophysiological processes. Combining circulating nucleic acid analysis with 
evaluations of plasticizer exposure may aid in stratifying high-risk 
pregnancies. Here, we examined the mechanisms by which plasticizers induce 
epigenetic alterations, their impact on reproductive health and pregnancy 
outcomes, and potential biomarkers for identifying these changes to facilitate 
tailored management of pregnancy complications and assess reproductive health 
risks.

Copyright Â© 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2025.109000
PMID: 40685096

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper